trace as well and the latest number of
cases
good afternoon and welcome to today's
downing street coronavirus
briefing i'm joined by professor
jonathan van tam the deputy chief
medical officer
and by dr susan hopkins the chief
medical advisor to nhs
test and trace and before we talk about
testing
and vaccines i'd like to update you on
the latest coronavirus data
the average number of new cases each day
is now 25 329
up from 22 443
last week there are
today 14 915 covered patients in
hospital across the uk
compared to 13 025 a week ago
and sadly yesterday 168 deaths were
reported
this means that in the last week we've
seen an average of 413 deaths
up from 332
a day a week ago my profound sympathies
are with everyone who has lost
a loved one throughout this pandemic and
these numbers make
painfully clear that this virus remains
a potent threat
and that threat is not just to the
oldest and the most vulnerable
but to anyone of any age and of any
background and we've already
seen the serious impact that long
covered can have on people's quality of
life
even at the fit and the young
symptoms like fatigue and breathlessness
muscle pain and neurological problems
long after they first had the virus and
we know
that long covered affects thousands of
people
many thousands of people and we've
already opened long covered clinics
in many parts of the country and i am
very pleased to be able to confirm
that the nhs will have a network of 40
long covered clinics right across
england
in place by the end of the month
they will bring together doctors nurses
the therapists and the other nhs staff
like physios to help those who are
suffering with the long-term
effects of coronavirus long-coverage
shows
that this virus can strike us all
and we must all do our bit to strike
back
by following the rules and denying the
virus the connections that it needs
to spread i know that this hasn't been
easy
and it's meant celebrating diwali or
commemorating
the fallen in ways that have been
different
this year to what we might normally do
and i want to say
thank you to everyone for their patience
we must persevere and get this
virus under control coronavirus is not a
short-term problem that can easily be
fixed
we must focus on the long-term solutions
underpinned by the best possible science
that can see us through this crisis and
also
lay firm foundations for the future
this of course includes our ability to
test at scale
we're constantly improving our response
to bring the confidence that high
quality testing
can provide we've already built the
largest coronavirus testing capacity in
europe up from 2000 tests a day in march
to our current capacity of more than
half a million
but we will not rest because testing
capacity helps
keep people safe and can help us get
things
back more like normal life
today i'm delighted that we can announce
two
new mega labs which will open early in
the new year
they will add another 600 000 capacity
to our daily capacity that doubles the
current capacity
they'll also create four thousand jobs
and crucially
they'll represent a permanent part of
the uk's
new diagnostics industry we didn't enter
this crisis with a major diagnostics in
the
industry and so together we have built
one
both to help beat the virus of course by
testing more people
and returning results more quickly
and to give our country a permanent
defense
that we might need for any future
epidemic
and to improve our care for so many
other diseases
like heart disease or cancer
or the flu and i am absolutely
determined
that we must have a massive diagnostics
capacity
not just for this pandemic but long into
the future
more capacity also speeds up turnaround
times
but speeding up these turnaround times
isn't just about the test it's also
about the logistics
so i want to take just one moment to
thank
the royal mail who from this weekend
will empty
some of their post boxes seven days a
week to speed up
home testing it's a big team effort
and i'm very grateful to our posties for
playing their part
in helping to keep people safe
expansion of testing matters because it
helps to protect people
and i just want to touch on some of the
reasons why it matters
it means we can test the most vulnerable
and those who
care for the most vulnerable and we can
test them more frequently
over the last week for instance we've
delivered
more than three million tests to nhs
staff
to begin their regular bi-weekly testing
and today i know so many people have
been
relieved to hear that we've started a
pilot for testing visitors in care homes
to use tests to allow people to visit
loved ones
in care homes in a way that keeps them
safe
and brings back some of those magical
moments of social contact
our expansion expansion of testing also
means we can roll out mass testing
further
we're making progress in the city-wide
testing across liverpool
and we're now rolling out this localized
approach to other areas
83 local authorities have now signed up
to receive
regular batches of these new lateral
flow tests
which can allow for results in minutes
this is an important step
and it combines the local insight
of the brilliant directors of public
health right across the country
with the strong national infrastructure
of nhs test and trace
combining to keep our communities safe
i also want to turn to vaccines while we
don't yet have a vaccine
we can now have hope you may have heard
the two
promising pieces of news from earlier
today
first janssen's phase three clinical
trials
are due to are beginning today
in 17 sites across the country including
southampton
dundee cardiff and belfast it's the
third vaccine to enter clinical trials
here
and should the trials come good and that
is by no means certain
then it can be and if it can be proved
to be safe
and effective we have 30 million doses
on order by the middle of next year
finally you will no doubt have seen the
excellent news that moderna have today
announced results
from their preliminary trial data
suggesting
that their vaccine has an effectiveness
of 94.5 percent
this is another encouraging step forward
although i stress
that this is preliminary the safety data
is
limited and their production facilities
are not yet
at scale should this latest vaccine be
approved
the doses would be available from spring
next year and i can announce that we
have today
secured an initial agreement for
five million doses of the moderna
vaccine
this is a similar rna technology to
pfizer beyond tech
of which we've already ordered 40
million doses
which should that be proved to work can
come on stream
potentially before the end of this year
across
diagnostics and vaccines great advances
in medical science are coming to the
rescue and while there is much
uncertainty we can see the candle of
hope
and we must do all that we can to
nurture its flame but we're not there
yet
until the science can make us safe we
must remain vigilant
and keep following the rules that we
know can keep this virus
under control i'm now going to hand over
to
dr hopkins to say more about our work on
mass testing
thank you testing is critically
important
in fighting the spread of coronavirus
because it allows us to find positive
cases
trace their contacts and to break the
chains of transmission
from the outset we have tested people
with symptoms
in laboratories and you've heard from
the secretary of state how we are
ramping up
the laboratory capacity however
alongside this we have been working with
our academic partners
to validate innovative point-of-care
tests
that will rapidly spread up the process
to find people with infectious virus
we have assessed these tests called
lateral flow devices
rigorously with public health england
and oxford university
and have moved four into field
evaluations to date
these are tests for the antigen not
antibody
so they determine whether you're
infectious and need to isolate
immediately in liverpool
we have used one of these tests to offer
rapid testing to individuals without
symptoms
this test has excellent accuracy
revealing
the majority of cases who have
infectious virus right now
today and with very low false positive
less than five per thousand these tests
can be read in 20 to 30 minutes
after starting the analysis process and
people all get their results in the same
day
and the majority much faster within one
to two hours
that means people can isolate quickly
and ensure they don't pass the infection
to others
the beauty of this test is that we find
that we can find people
who are not symptomatic meaning we can
stop transmissions before they
potentially occur
and we are especially grateful to the
people of liverpool and the directors of
public health local government and
academic partners
who have worked so hard to get thousands
of people tested
over the last ten days with military
support we have tested almost a hundred
thousand people
in the liverpool testing sites with the
lateral flow devices
and found more than 700 people who would
otherwise have not been detected
as you've heard we're looking to
replicate this across the country
i'm working with directors of public
health who can target the tests for
their own population
understanding the populations who are
most at need of testing
we're also running evaluations in
schools and universities
and are planning to test university
students
prior to going home at christmas
and you will have heard also that we are
now using these tests in healthcare
workers
and in care homes and i envisage that
this will really help us
support people visiting home safely
a negative test means that you are
unlikely to be infectious at that moment
in time
but you will still need to follow the
rules hands face space
in case you're incubating the virus and
also to avoid other people
transmitting the virus to you i will now
show you an animation
and talk through how it works
these tests show that you take a sample
swab
from a nose or arthritis throat
and the swab is then mixed in a tube
with some buffer solution
this releases and breaks up the virus to
allow it to be a test
in the test we then drop a couple of
drops onto the lateral flow device that
looks a bit like this
and then the solution containing the
fragments of virus
is starts to move along the adsorbent
strip
it hits an area which has some labeled
antibodies
and these are the antibodies that allow
you to detect whether the test is
working
and whether the test is positive and so
they join together
and keep moving along the strip
once this occurs those with virus
particles
bind strongly to the fragments and then
they attach to the test zone
the remainder of those virus labeled
antibodies
those that is labeled antibodies keep
moving along
and keep strip going along the adsorbent
strip
to what's called the control zone and
the control zone is very important
because that allows us to determine
whether the test works or not
after about five minutes a colored band
will appear in the control zone
this shows the test is working and
therefore we can now read
whether the virus is present or not
a colored band at the virus test zone
shows the test is positive
and the virus is present it usually
takes
between 10 and 30 minutes to read the
test
and in the case of the test in liverpool
we wait a full 30 minutes to say the
test is negative
thank you thank you very much indeed
we'll now take some questions from the
public and then
we will take questions from the media so
the first is bethany from wandsworth
the current advice on the priority list
for vaccines focuses on age
will those who are shielding but are not
over 65
be prioritized to have the vaccine if
not
do you expect all those shielding to
continue to shield until they have
access to a vaccine
this could be six months or longer of
waiting
thank you bethany this is an incredibly
important question
and i understand how important the
prioritization of any vaccine will be
we've been doing an awful lot of work on
it and there is a
statutory body an official body that
advises me as health secretary as to
what the right
clinical priority should be it's called
the joint committee
on vaccinations and immunizations
and it's they who have set out the
interim
prioritization based on what we know
already
of the the the two leading vaccines the
fisa vaccine and the astrazeneca
vaccine but they will update that when
they see the final
data and they make this clinical
judgment
and they also talk to jonathan van tam
about what that might be
and this clinical judgment does take
into account
those who are clinically extremely
vulnerable
and to make sure that they get the
appropriate vaccination
according to their risk level and maybe
jvt you could set out
in more detail where that's up to on
this and i should stress
this interim guidance from the
formal joint committee yes thanks
secretary state
the guidance is indeed interim
provisional
and the reason for that is that we do
not yet have the data
on the vaccines that will be available
to us
and authorized by the mhra and we can't
make those
final decisions until it is understood
if the vaccines are suitable for all
groups i'm hoping so
but that is a decision that has to be
made in the future
it is very clear that the clinically
extremely vulnerable
are on the jcvi priority list
and many of them will already be
subsumed within
the priority order on the provisional
list
by virtue of age or by virtue of having
chronic underlying conditions right down
to the age of 18.
so from that perspective i do expect
there to be
coverage of the clinically extremely
vulnerable
thank you jvt the next question is from
divya from leicester
and divya asks will a national lockdown
be extended past
december the second if cases and deaths
continue to rise
and if not what is the reasoning behind
this
well thank you another excellent and
important
question and the answer is that it is
too early for us to know what
the what the number of cases will be as
we
come to the end of the current
lockdown i might ask susan to add a few
more details
but what i'd say is that at the moment
most of the tests that we're getting
back and most of the positive cases
are from around the time when the
lockdown came in
and so we are yet to see in the data and
it's too early to expect to see in the
data
the impact of the second lockdown but we
absolutely hope to be able to replace
the national lockdown with a tiered
system
similar to what we had before but we of
course are assessing that and assessing
how we can make sure
that that will be effective susan so
absolutely
the key issue for us is making sure that
cases start to fall
and we expect if the lockdown is working
and we're all doing the best we can to
have
reduced or no social contact with other
people that we will start to see cases
decline over the next week
we expect it will be longer to see
hospital admissions another week or so
but i think that as long as we start
seeing cases decline then we can start
making
a judgment about what are the right
decisions that we make and what are the
opening up decisions that happen on
december the second
uh thanks susan and and just to stress
um
uh divia i know that lester has been in
lockdown measures for
an awfully long time they are important
to keep this under control but we are
the best thing that everybody can do is
to follow
the rules and to try to limit the
transmission of the virus
and of course if you are uh if you are
contacted by nhs test and trace it's so
important that you do self-isolate
because that will help to control
the spread of the virus the next
question is from
fergus walsh of the bbc fergus
yeah a question to matt hancock you say
you've ordered
five million doses of the modern vaccine
that's enough to immunize two and a half
million people do you regret not being
able to
buy anymore and and first to professor
van tam are you a bit more confident
today
even more confident than a week ago that
coveted vaccines will work
well thanks fergus i'm i'm delighted
that we've now been able to expand our
portfolio of
vaccines from six to seven um
the moderna vaccine is uh on a base on a
similar platform to the fisa beyond tech
vaccine and of course we have 40 million
of those
to be that are on order should it work
as we constantly stress neither of these
vaccines is approved
we haven't seen the full safety data we
can't be sure
but i pay tribute to the vaccines task
force who've done this
buying you know even concluding the
moderna deal
today i paid tribute to alok sharma
who's
worked incredibly hard on getting this
over the line including today
and uh done a done a great job so it's
really good news that we've got some of
the modern
uh vaccine on um on whether it's a
on the number um the thing is that the
moderna vaccine doesn't come on stream
until until the spring and so
i'm just really pleased that we've got
those early vaccines that will be
available
early and we've already got the orders
of those in
jvt yes so i'll follow on from the
second question
first fergus and say that the vaccines
task force
we've had to consider a whole range of
vaccines
first of all in terms of modality or
mode of action the type of vaccine
to make sure that we spread our bets
over the different types that are coming
forwards
because when you start that process you
have no assurance
that anything is going to work secondly
you have to temper that against the
likely quantities available
and then you have to temper that against
the likely
timings of the availability of those
quantities
accepting that all of that is mired in
how difficult it will or will not be for
individual manufacturers
to make these at huge scale over the
next
months and years so all that has to be
factored in and that's
why we've ended up committing to 350
million
doses across multiple targets
but your first question do i feel more
encouraged
in relation to another messenger rna
vaccine
showing that it is making covid19
potentially in the future a
vaccine-preventable disease
then absolutely so it's brilliant news
absolutely brilliant
it's the second penalty now that's also
gone into the back of the net
so we're starting to feel in a better
position
thanks very much jvt for cheering us all
up the next question is from uh thomas
moore at sky
and mr hancock the modena vaccine was
always one of the
front runners why wasn't it part of the
uk stockpile from the very start
why join the queue now when you've only
managed to secure
enough to protect two and a half million
people
professor van tam does this
second penalty as you describe it give
you confidence that we may actually get
a very good result with the oxford
vaccine which is also due to report
imminently
thanks i'll take the first and hand the
second to you jvt if that's okay
um the thing is uh thomas there isn't a
stockpile
this vaccine hasn't yet been
manufactured
um and here in europe the first
availability will be in the
spring um and that means that obviously
we've been
it's critical that we've been buying the
first vaccines that will be available
and if you take the pfizer vaccine plus
the astroxenica
agreements then between them we have
over 100 million doses on order
um it is also good though to have some
of these
uh these other vaccines hence we
we we spread the portfolio so that's why
we've taken the approach
that we have to make sure that we have a
a good spread
of the vaccines and as today's news
demonstrates
we keep buying this process isn't over
we keep buying i just want to correct
you jvt
you said we've got 350 million we've now
got 355 million
on order over to you for the second
question yes
so um on your question was specifically
about the astra zenica oxford vaccine
and whether any vaccine is going to work
is
simply unknowable until the data
have been looked at and nobody's looked
at the data
at this point in time it is the same for
all of the vaccines
still in phase 3 that have not read out
nevertheless
pretty much all of the vaccines around
the world that are in development
are targeting the coronavirus spike
protein
as the visa beyond tech vaccine has done
as the moderna vaccine has done
this really does begin to show us that
the spike protein
is a completely plausible
and effective target for vaccines to be
um working against and you know when we
started this journey back in
february march we didn't even know that
so yes we are
um we're we're feeling in a happier
place than we were
but do we know the data no we don't
we're not there yet thanks very much
thomas catherine jones from
channel 5. secretary of state thank you
you said in response to divya's question
about at the end
of the england so-called lockdown that
it was too early to
see in the data whether additional
measures would be needed but
the sage subgroups my m has reported to
you
that england returning to just three
tiers
on december the second does risk the r
value
rising again and would undo potentially
any decline in numbers that you do begin
to see
with hospitals already under intense
pressure this could really put strain on
them
come mid december and so i'm wondering
what
measures post december the second you
are arguing for
within government on behalf of the nhs
and all its staff
to avoid a winter of really unparalleled
difficulty for them
well that's not quite what sage says and
it's well worth going and reading their
precise advice
because it's not about whether there's a
tears system
but it's also about what measures are in
each tier
but maybe susan hopkins would be better
placed to set out the
the scientific advice on this so i think
we we have recognized that the uh the
tiering of the
country has had a different effect in
each area
tier 3 and especially tier 3 plus in the
north
has had an effect in reducing the
numbers of cases in the northwest
and we can see the northwest declining
number of cases now
tier two seems to hold in some areas and
not so well in others
and so really it depends on how fast
transmission is occurring
and how well the individuals in the
population are taking that advice in
we see very little effect from tier one
and i think when we
look at what tiers may be there in the
future we will have to think about
strengthening them
in order to get us through the winter
months until the vaccine's available
for everyone thanks very much uh
catherine gordon rayner from the
telegraph
gordon thank you thank you secretary of
state um can i just ask
uh the prime minister has told us that
he is bursting with antibodies having
had coronavirus
and yet he is still having to
self-isolate for 14 days
we know the government is considering
bringing in a five-day quarantine
period now if you have a test after five
days
is it not time to rethink the whole
policy
of self-isolating for 14 days
and just secondly you said earlier today
that you can't rule out
mandatory vaccinations i know you're not
planning it have you had discussions
perhaps
about people in certain jobs not being
able to go to those jobs such as nursing
if they haven't had a vaccine once one
becomes available
we haven't had any of those such uh
discussions uh
on the first question um of course we
always keep under review
the clinical advice of what
uh you know how we can keep this virus
under control
um whilst minimizing the impact on
people's lives and
you know the the prime minister going
into self-isolation
is a an absolutely clear demonstration
that
everybody no matter who you are needs to
follow the rules if you're asked by nhs
test and trace
to self-isolate that it is absolutely
vital that you do
and the prime minister is demonstrating
that through his personal
leadership in following those rules um
and um so of course we keep those things
under review
but we're not at a stage to be able to
make any changes yet
sean linton from the independent
secretary of state thank you very much
um throughout the
pandemic the independent has spoken to
line nhs staff many of them report being
exhausted
they are broken now cases rising they're
facing a bleak winter
with widespread staff shortages and
morale at rock bottom
but over the past 10 years most have
suffered real terms pay cuts
and you were filmed numerous times
clapping for carers
earlier in the year can you commit today
to giving nhs staff
a meaningful above inflation pay rise to
help boost recruitment
and most of all to help make patients
safer on wards
well thank you sean as you know we've we
have a
an independent pay review uh process
and we've concluded a three-year
agreement with
nurses in fact we've just concluded a
long-term
agreement with junior doctors as well so
i'm
though you tempt me i'm not going to
prejudge the
the outcomes of the independent pay
review process
uh finally uh jamie cafash from pulse
magazine
hey secretary of state during the
election you acknowledged we needed 6
000 new gps
since then the number of full-time
equivalent fully trained gps has
decreased
gps are doing more consultations than
ever and they're carrying out the
biggest flu vaccine program ever
so can you reassure patients and gps
that you will reduce their non-urgent
workload
to free up time for them to carry out
the covert vaccination program
while ensuring patients can continue to
access the urgent care they need
well this is an incredibly important
question and i'm going to ask jbt to
comment as
part of the vaccines rollout and with
his clinical background
but what i'd say to every gp is how
grateful i am for the work that you're
doing
and your whole practice everybody in
primary care
both on the flu vaccine right now
which is being rolled out in record
numbers and we've had a
record uptake we've had a 10 percentage
point
increase on the normal uptake of flu
vaccines and that's
really good news and of course on the
normal pressures
of primary care i'm really glad that a
much bigger proportion of
appointments in primary care are now
done either over the phone or by video
because that
makes life easier for gps and for
for patients and that's been a there's
been a really positive response
to that but that doesn't of course lift
the whole burden even though it makes
access easier
and of course we've got hopefully
hopefully a covid vaccination program
ready to ready to go and i've asked the
nhs to be ready to roll that out from
the 1st of december that's the first
possible date it could be ready that
isn't my central expectation
at all but we do need to be ready for
them because that is
theoretically the earliest this could
possibly be
the bulk of the rollout is likely to be
in the new year if a vaccine one of the
two early vaccines comes
through and that's the fisa vaccine the
astrazeneca vaccine
and we must be ready and i want to thank
in advanced gps for all the work that i
know that they're doing
now and that they'll be even more of
this winter to keep people
safe and on the clinical aspects if i
can hand over to jbt
yes i mean you know clearly the covid
vaccine program
as soon as we have authorized vaccines
and
quantities at scale is going to be the
biggest and the most
important thing the nhs has done
for a very long while and primary care
are front and center stage
in all of the immunization programs that
the nhs
has ever delivered and will continue to
be so
i do understand the workload pressures
but i do also think that it will be
incumbent upon every one of
us to put in extraordinary
efforts to make this program move
as fast as we can consistent with the
available supplies
and with the highest uptake we can
possibly manage
this is a big opportunity
to change the way the pandemic will roll
out
over 2021 it isn't going to produce
an overnight result it isn't going to
affect the second wave that we're now in
but it could very dramatically change
what the late spring
and the summer start to look like the
precise bounds on that are unknown
but that's how big the prize is and
therefore it's
really important that everyone pushes so
hard on this
not just the workforce but also the
public
in terms of coming forwards for the
vaccine and as i said at the other press
conference
being ready when you're called thank you
very much jvt i just said one more thing
because it's such an important subject
this
um i know the pressures that the covid
vaccine
rollout will put on to people across the
nhs
it isn't just gps although gps and and
the teams around
primary care the primary care nurses
and the pharmacists will play an
important role it's
right across the nhs there will be
there will be work to do to get this
vaccine
rolled out and i also know that there's
a number of uncertainties which make
planning
harder but it doesn't make planning
impossible and so it's critical
that we get all that lined up so that
we're ready to go
from the start of december and i want to
thank in advance everybody who's
involved in the nhs and more broadly in
the rollout of the vaccine
it's going to be a big job thanks very
much indeed to everybody this
ends the the downing street coronavirus
daily briefing thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with
dot bbc.co.uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news